Hear God's word from Genesis chapter 49, only verses one through seven this morning.
That's exciting.
Hear God's word.
Then Jacob called his sons and said, gather yourselves together that I might tell you what shall happen to you in the days to come.
Assemble and listen.
O sons of Jacob, listen to Israel, your father.
Ruben, you are my firstborn, my might.
In the first fruits of my strength, preeminent in dignity and preeminent in power.
Unstable as water, you shall not have preeminence because you went up to your father's bed and you defiled it.
He went up to my couch, simian and Levi our brothers, weapons of violence are their swords.
Let my soul come not into their counsel.
Oh my glory, not be not joined to their company.
For in their anger, they killed men.
And in their wilfulness, the hamstrung oxen cursed be their anger for it is fierce, and their wrath for it is cruel.
I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them in Israel.
The grass withers and the flowers fade, but the word of our God will stand forever.
And then you may be seated.
Please pray with me.
merciful God in heaven.
We give you thanks for your love, for your children, your love that speaks to us.
I pray that you would speak to us through your word this morning, that we encourage our hearts, that you would strengthen our faith and conviction, that you would stir our hearts to follow you with great vigor.
We pray this in your holy name, amen.
I remember when I was a teenager, I got to go to this summer camp in near Spokane called Pine Low.
And like any good summer camp, they had ropes courses for you to climb and play in.
And one of the ropes courses elements was this leap of faith, where you'd climb up top of this tower.
And it was like 75 feet in the air.
And you had a harness and a rope on.
And then you'd jump out and catch this bar.
And, you know, when you're on the ground, you're looking up at this thing like, okay, that seems pretty simple, looks pretty close, seems pretty doable.
And then you climb up there, and you've got the harness on, they put the rope on, you know, looking at that bar, and all of a sudden it doesn't look so close.
And you're like, you know, I've seen other people go before, I know that the rope will probably catch them.
But also, I'm sure that there's not a 0% chance that I died doing this, you know?
So you start to do the math ahead.
I don't want to be that 0.01% that dies doing this trick.
And he starts to wonder, can I trust the rope?
Can I trust the person holding the rope down below?
What if it doesn't catch me?
What if I die?
And I think the grace of God can be a little bit like that for us at times.
We know grace is there.
This is what we talk about, amazing grace.
We sing the songs.
We have the slogans, the grace-filled life.
We got the grace-filled Bibles, the probably studied Bibles, called that somewhere.
If not, this is a marketing opportunity for somebody in the room.
You know, we have grace this, we have grace that.
It's all over the place.
It's like those words that we talk about, like gospel.
But so many of us, we don't even know what these words mean, not really.
Where do they hit the ground in our lives?
And because of that, grace is one of these things that I think, whether we realize it or not,
It's like this rope where we wonder, can we actually trust it?
There's grace, which is this unmerited favor that God has for his people.
Can I trust it?
What I mean by that is this, what if I confess my sin?
What if you know the dark corners of my heart?
Will I still have favor from you and my life then?
How does that favor work in my life with my sin, with my struggles?
Well, grace catch me then if you knew what was going on in my life.
And because of this, I think we tend to hide.
We have these partial confessions.
There's of course like the big ticket sins, the addictions, the legal stuff, the stuff that's going to get you in prison.
But then there's the other stuff, the other stuff that we deal with daily, the insecurities that we have.
So they just act in strange ways, relationally, that we just kind of keep ourselves.
We never talk to anybody about it.
Or the anger that boils up and boils out in our lives, or the discipline in life that we lack in different areas where we know where those areas are.
But we never actually talk to anybody or seek help.
Because what if this person knows that I'm weak in this area?
Will they still have favor?
There's all sorts of things we ignore in life.
Because we're not sure, will this rope of grace hold us?
Will I still have favor in community?
Well, I still have favor with God if you actually knew the things I struggled with.
So we suck it up, we stay quiet.
And I think that the places that we hide from others are the places that we've actually struggled to trust that grace is real, that it actually is true, that it actually is amazing like we sing, which means I think we're living in almost like a half life of what we're called to live.
In Genesis chapter 49,
which is before us, which we're kind of slowing down as we get to this chapter.
It's at the end of Genesis.
There's only 50 chapters.
We're almost there.
But slowing down as Jacob calls his sons to himself to give them this final word.
His sons are about to find out if grace will hold.
I mean, he gathers them to himself, one final blessing, one final word.
But if you think about these men, these men are not what you would call good men.
They're liars, they're violent, they're immoral.
The question is, what will the Father say to them?
Now there's sins out in the open.
What will the Father's final words be to His sons?
And while this theme of grace may not be obvious as you're reading this, like, oh, is this really about grace?
As you look at these narratives, there's these underpinning themes of Scripture that hold all the narrative of Scripture together.
And I think at least one theme that we can look at here and learn
A lot about is the nature of grace, which is so important for us as we think about our own futures, what holds our future together, what's our promise of the future, what's our blessing that the Lord gives us.
And I think if we don't understand it in the context of grace, we actually don't understand the future that is before us.
And so I think there's three things that we're gonna learn about the nature of grace that'll teach us to learn how to trust it in our lives.
Those three things are these, that grace is an invitation from God,
Grace is an invitation from God, saying that God first has to come to us with this invitation of grace.
Secondly, grace tells the truth.
Grace tells the truth.
It actually holds up a mirror to your life.
That's an uncomfortable part of grace.
And finally, the grace forgives the greatest of sinners.
The grace forgives the greatest of sinners.
So look with me back here at the beginning that grace is an invitation from God.
Literally back here at verse one and two, it says, and then Jacob called his sons and said, gather yourselves together, that I may tell you what shall happen to you in the days to come.
Assemble and listen, those sons of Jacob, listen to Israel, your father.
This is kind of beautiful scene at the end of Jacob's life.
He knows he's dying.
And so he's gathering his sons to himself, and it's this weighty moment.
And this isn't like he's gathering people around to a hospital bed just to give them this sentimental moment that's like, hey, you know, it's great being your father.
And it's not just niceties.
In this moment, it's prophetic.
And the words that he's gonna speak over as people are prophetic, meaning it's more than just a fortune cookie, like, hey, this could happen to you.
It's like, no, this is your future.
He's telling them what their future is gonna be.
As the covenant family of God, as they continue to live and grow in this land, he's telling them how God's going to fulfill his mission in and through his sons.
And you can almost feel at least a little bit of this tension.
The sons know what's about to happen.
They know that their father's calling them.
They're going to say these things.
And they've got to be thinking, what will he say about me?
What will he say my future is going to be?
What's the prophetic feature for my life?
Is it going to be a blessing?
Is it going to be a curse?
But of both.
And again, these guys are not exactly in the morality Hall of Fame.
I don't know if there is one of those.
I don't think any of us are probably in there either.
But these guys certainly are not in there, right?
Ruben slept with his father's servant, trying to overthrow him, not great.
Simeon and Levi slaughtered a whole city.
Again, not
Great, don't recommend those things.
And even the individual sins that aren't named in these guys, they all are guilty of selling their brother into slavery.
Also, not great.
It's pretty bad things to do.
This family's a mess of violence and jealousy and all the things.
And yet before you move on into the story, a fact that we can move past is this, that the Father calls them anyway.
The father knows everything that these guys have done.
Obviously, he's naming it.
He knows who he's calling to himself.
This isn't a surprise.
And yet, God, I mean, the father, Jacob, calls them anyway.
Before there's any correction, if there's any words, there's an invitation.
This is grace, this unmerited favor of a father to his sons.
They didn't earn this favor from Jacob.
They did everything they could to actually destroy favor, right?
Even if you just think of the selling the son, his favorite son thing, that'd be enough to destroy a father's favor towards you, but not him.
He's still, you're still my son.
Draw near to me.
Come to me.
And of course, this mirrors the way our heavenly father draws close to us.
Teaching us, the first most important thing we learn about grace here is that grace searches us out.
It searches you out.
It has to come to you first.
We don't go to it.
We can't make ourselves clean.
We can't dress up for it to look good to try to attract it to us.
No, it finds us.
We don't find it.
I think this is a simple truth, but it's profound implications because I think oftentimes we imagine this scenario backwards.
I think we think it's something, and maybe we find once we earn it, we know it's unmerited, but it's like maybe like half and half, you know, like half unmerited, half-merited, I mean, clearly you gotta be moving in the right trajectory to be able to get this grace towards you, something we find once we're cleaned up, once we prove ourselves, and then we get the promise of a future, because we want that grace to be like a good investment, you wouldn't wanna invest grace on somebody that's just gonna abuse it, right?
I think this is how we think about it, and then we'll,
We'll earn it kind of, you know?
But this is not grace.
By definition, it is impossible to earn this.
Unmerited.
You know, if you think about like merit badges, you know, how do you get a merit badge for archery?
By being able to be good at archery.
If you keep on missing the target, you're not going to earn a merit badge because it's given to you based on your capacity to do that thing.
There's no merit badge for grace, for earning it.
It's unmarited.
You can never be good enough to have it.
It has to come to you first and it comes to you precisely because you can do nothing to earn it yourself.
That favor of God happens as God graciously comes to you.
The only way you can get it is when the Father moves to you first.
And this scene is echoed throughout all of scripture.
The God is the God who first moves to us.
It's even how our worship services mimic this.
We're God's the one that calls us first and we respond.
God's the one that created all things and creation responds by coming to life, even in the first sin.
God's the one that goes first to Adam and Eve.
Adam and Eve are not seeking God out through it, through where they're hiding from him, right?
And you just go through Noah, how did Noah get found?
God goes to him, Abraham.
He's a pagan, God goes to him and draws him to himself and on and on from Moses to the prophets to finally in the incarnation, God is the one who's always moving first towards his people.
Jesus himself is who?
He's the good shepherd, the one who does what?
Who chases after the lost sheep?
He's the one who says he comes for the sick.
Grace is a gift that's freely given that comes first to you and this teaches us that we need to understand that listen, no one can earn grace
Grace is something that comes to you by God's sovereign hand, inviting you to Himself, and you come to Him empty-handed.
I think sometimes people can wonder and they can think about this, okay, they can overthink it.
Not that anyone in this room has been ever guilty of overthinking it, but we can wonder, well, how do I know?
How do I know if I'm called?
How do I know that God's
invited me to his grace.
Well, the fact that you're hearing these words this morning, I can assure you, God has invited you to experience his grace, to know it.
He's offering you unmerited favor in him.
Questions always, do we ignore this gift being offered?
You know, it's one thing if you're in this room and maybe you don't have faith in Christ, this is this first time offer of grace that you receive.
That's part of this.
But part of this is just to ongoing walking with the Lord in life.
You never outgrow your need for grace.
You could be walking with the Lord for 50 years, growing in righteousness.
And you still need just as much grace as anybody else in the world.
You never earn this.
It's always freely given.
This is part of the life.
We never outgrow a need of grace.
You're never good enough on your own.
We're called to walk in grace and grow in grace.
Maybe the next question then is this,
Okay, let's say God comes to us.
He offers us grace.
But what does it look like to answer that offer of grace?
What does it look like to actually draw near to God and accept His invitation and have His grace pour into our lives?
What does that look like?
What does that favor look like?
This is the second thing we find here is that grace tells the truth.
Grace
tells the truth.
It comes to us first, we don't go to it, and when it finds us, it tells the truth.
And this is probably the more uncomfortable part about grace, the part that doesn't often get talked about, but it's essential to be able to walk in grace in your life.
Look at me back here at verse three, this is when Jacob's talking to Ruben, he's like Ruben, you're my first board, my might.
And the first fruits of my strength,
Preeminent in dignity and preeminent in power.
Rubens got to be thinking, man, this is going pretty well so far.
Maybe standing up a little straighter.
I liked the way this is headed.
I thought this was going to be rough, but oh, maybe he forgot about that.
You know, the whole sleeping with his servant thing.
And then verse four happens.
Unstable is water.
You shall not have preeminence because you went up to your father's bed and you defiled it.
He went up to my couch.
It's this weighty moment.
It's like that took a turn and you can almost, you can hear the pain in his voice.
Even this final phrase, he's like, he's saying it and then he's like, he's looking up.
He's like, he did this thing.
Can you believe that he did this thing?
There's indignation, right?
Ruben's sin is told for all to hear.
We don't know if anyone else knew about this sin of Ruben's, but they know now.
Spoken out loud for everyone to hear that he slept with his father's servant and was more than just a sexual sin.
Most people will say that this was his attempt to actually overthrow his father's authority and to take control of the family.
This is what he tried to do, insurrection.
And it's being told for everybody when grace draws near, all right, that favor, that kindness of God that comes to our life, that acts unexpectedly.
It does something we don't want it to do.
It tells the truth about us, the full truth.
It does not ignore your sin, nor does it ignore the consequences of sin.
I mean, Ruben gets demoted.
He has no more preeminence.
What this means?
It means like all three of these sons, they lose their place in the family.
And we'll see next week that Judah actually gets, replaces them and is functionally the oldest brother in the family.
He loses his place, and even his tribe kind of goes into obscurity, and there's no kings, there's no judges, there's no great leaders, no great legacy comes from him.
Grace comes and it tells the truth about your life.
Out loud.
It gets, this continues on with Simeon and Levi here.
We see this with our five to seven, these brothers, their weapons of violence are their swords.
He says, let my soul come not into their counsel.
Oh, my glory, be not joined to their company.
From the anger they killed men in the wilderness.
They hamstrung the ox and cursed be their anger for his fears.
This is a wild thing where these guys came up and they slaughtered an entire city.
These are men that are ruled by their anger, their violence, is their leading edge.
It exposes their character flaws.
And again,
Grace is telling the truth of their lives.
You are violent.
You are to be displaced.
You're going to be spread.
There's consequences that these are people that become scattered.
I mean, Simian's tribe dwindles.
And by the end of the book of Numbers, his tribe dwindles in the smallest of all tribes.
And eventually it gets absorbed into Judah's tribe.
Levi's tribe never gets to inherit any land when they go into the Promised Land.
The fascinating aspect of grace is that it draws us to gods and then names our sin.
And actually names the cost of our sin.
When grace comes to you, it does not first flatter you.
It's not sentimental.
It tells the truth, which is very uncomfortable and not actually what we want.
When we think of grace, what do we want?
We want that favor to come to us and say, you know what?
You're awesome.
Don't worry about all those mistakes you made.
That's what we want.
We want grace to come to us and be like, uh, you know, so you slaughtered a city.
I've seen people slaughtered more.
Not that big a deal, right?
So you slept with my servant.
Ah, there's people have done worse in the Bible.
You know, not that, not that big a deal.
That's what we want.
We want that soft and sentimental grace that just wishes away our sin and so we can just move on already.
We want cheap grace.
That's what that is.
It's a cheap grace.
Why do we want that?
Because I think we're afraid to be seen.
Because deep down we wonder, can grace actually handle the full picture of what I've done in life?
We know grace saves sinners, but this is like this kind of sinner, right?
But this isn't real grace.
This kind of grace actually will not help you.
If you can't merit this,
If grace is something you can't merit in life, or if this is favor, it has to be able to handle the fullness of our story.
And that's the real grace we see here, the real grace that heals, that gives you a future, handles the fullness of your story.
Because grace doesn't come to you despite your needyness, but because you're needy.
We tend to have two different responses to this kind of thing.
There's two different kinds of people that respond to this.
And some of you,
Struggle with only dwelling on your problems on your failures where that's your inner inner monologue and your voice is just constantly telling you that you're not good enough you have no problem accepting Your weakness and your failure And you know your failures live rent-free in your mind Others are the opposite where you tend to minimize?
Your neediness you tend to minimize the sin in your life like that's not that big deal and you kind of
You have a conscience that's not easily offended, and it's not always good, right?
You assume that you're basically good, and I think what Grace does in this moment of confrontation of telling the truth, it actually confronts both those tendencies.
Because as it holds a mirror to your life, as it shows you the truth, it shows you the truth.
Not more than the truth, you're not worse than you think you are, but you're not better than you think you are.
It's just the truth.
And grace can actually show you this full truth precisely because it is strong enough to handle it.
And it has to be able to tell you the truth and you have to be able to accept the truth about your neediness, about the sin in your life.
Because for you to actually experience the sweetness and how sweet forgiveness is, you have to understand that God knows full well what he is forgiving in your life.
He's not surprised.
by your sin struggles.
He's not like, oh, yeah, forgiven.
And then all of a sudden you're like, but did you see this page of my life?
And he's like, oh, well, what about that?
I don't know about that one.
That's not how it works.
It's full.
And we have to understand that.
He sees it all and that he forgives it.
Grace in some ways has to kill us before it can raise us to new life.
And we can trust it to do this because of what grace does next.
As grace comes to us, if grace finds us, it's the favor the Lord finds us first.
As that grace shows us the truth of the reality of our lives, it does that.
That's that you wallow in your sin and you just feel bad about yourself so that you can experience the fullness of the forgiveness it's offered in the gospel.
This is the final thing we see here is that grace forgives the greatest of sinners.
The grace forgives the greatest of sinners.
I will say, this point is not obvious in this narrative.
Especially in these first three candidates, all we see is their loss, their displacement.
But first, before we get into the weeds a little bit, I want you to first, again, just consider the basic setting of this text.
Despite these guys sin, they still get called sons, they still get drawn to Jacob,
There's still sons.
None of these men are disowned, even in their judgment here.
They still have tribes.
They're still part of this covenant family.
This is kind of this beautiful first truth about this forgiveness is that grace doesn't kick them out of the family.
There's consequences, but they're forgiven.
They're still in.
And I think we see this truth most fully in Levi's story.
You see at the end of this,
Verse seven, curse be their anger for this fierce and their wrath for this cruel divide them and Jacob and scatter them in Israel.
You know, it's a story of scattering.
Again, Levi's family does not inherit any land.
They have no home.
And then something unexpected happens to Levi's lineage.
You know, the Levites become, they become the priests of the land.
It's interesting.
You know, priests did.
God's grace to the people of God.
They're the ones that offer the sacrifice that lead the people in temple worship.
In other words, the Levites were like the pastors to the people.
The descendants of a murderer, the descendants of a murderer became the pastors to God's people, to a whole nation.
Isn't that wild?
But if you think about it, who better to mediate the grace of God to the people of God than those who have felt it most deeply, than those who have stared into the mirror of their lives, that have reckoned with the reality of their sin, and have accepted this offer to grace, and now they can freely mediate that to the people.
It's a beautiful reality.
God doesn't merely forgive.
His people, He repurposes them.
He takes our wounds and gives them a vocation of grace in our lives and in this world.
The Levites are not priests clearly because they're better, because they have this some great lineage.
They're priests precisely because of the opposite, of their neediness, that they are people who have tasted deeply from the well of grace.
And now that from that well that they've drunk, they're dispensing it to God's people.
And this is not just a theme here, this is a theme throughout all of scripture.
You know, three of the most prolific writers of the Bible were all murderers.
You have Moses who murdered in Egyptian, right?
That kind of set him on his trajectory out of Egypt.
You have David who, trying to cover up his sin, murder demand.
And the New Testament, you have Paul, once we saw, he oversaw the murder of Stephen.
This is a theme of,
Scripture.
That God takes the wounds of our lives and applies His grace and balm and work in those places.
This is true of you too, that God turns your wounds into places of ministry.
And maybe at least a final question to this is, well, how does God actually do this?
Like, how does this work where God can actually, both on one hand, be like this judge who's like telling us the truth
And on the other hand, in the midst of Tonus, the truth about the depth of our sins, forgive us.
How do these things work hand in hand?
Especially when we see here the curse, again, the curse be their anger, which makes us think of Genesis chapter three, when we find out it's not just these guys that are cursed, but there's this curse that's over all creation, Christian and relationships with each other, with the land, with God himself.
How does God work in the midst of this cursed world?
This points us forward to then the fullness of time when another son of Jacob comes through the line of Judah, where instead of receiving blessings, the curses of a nation fall on him.
Christ redeemed us from a curse by becoming a curse, which is what we read earlier in this passage that Christ in Galatians three in our in our liturgy this morning, that Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law by becoming a curse for us.
Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree.
This is what we see here.
The Christ redeems us from this curse that we inherit by becoming the curse for us.
And not only does he take the curse of our sin on himself, but he actually gives us righteousness.
When his grace comes for us, when his favor comes to us, his goodness comes to us.
He makes us sons and daughters.
He gives us a new future.
and inheritance.
It's not gained by our works, but it's a gift from being found in Christ.
Now when he looks at you, the favor of the Lord looks at you and he sees son.
He sees daughter.
He says, yes, you carry wounds and scars like Christ's body did in the resurrection.
But even those become testimony of God's grace that those scars and those wounds don't define you, his grace does.
His answer to your identity does.
That says, listen, if God can forgive these guys, if God can forgive me, knowing the fullness of my sin, even the sins I have not yet committed, and he can raise me to new life by his grace, by his favor, and he can do this for you too.
This transforms us.
There's two ways this does.
I think the first is it teaches us to be a people who do not hide.
It teaches us to be a people who trust grace to hold us.
That when grace comes to you, you can recognize it comes to you when you actually have to reckon with your sin.
That is God's grace coming to you.
It's actually His wrath that lets you go into sin and be unconfronted by it.
The Lord disciplines the ones He loves.
When by His grace it comes to you, it often comes to you.
You can recognize it by showing you a mirror to your life, showing you your mistakes and your sin.
And what grace says is you don't have to run from those moments.
You don't have to overly dwell on them, but you don't have to run from.
The verdict is in by grace you are forgiven.
And because of that you can confess freely and you can trust that grace will handle your sin.
The second final thing as it does is I think it teaches us to be serious about our
our pursuit of holiness.
I mean, because of the cost of grace is great, we ought not treat it lightly.
Paul had to deal with this, you know, and people are saying, no, maybe because God's grace and mercy and forgiveness is so great, then I can just sin and do whatever I want.
And he's like, no, by no means, right?
It's precisely because of the grace that we're called to live up into our, live up to our name as sons and daughters of the living God, not to earn anything,
But because we've already earned everything we have in Christ, we follow Him, and we grow in Him.
So we learn about grace, and it's the thing that calls you to itself.
It has to first come to you, and if you are hearing these words this morning, I can assure you it has come to you, and it's gonna tell you the truth, it's gonna be painful, it's gonna be a death, but it's a death that's necessary to lead you into the resurrection life with Christ, giving you a future with Him, come, receive it, taste of it, bring your sin into the light,
Experience the grace of God, and as you do, extend that grace to others.
Pray with me.
Merciful God in heaven, we give you thanks for the truth of your grace.
Father, we're a people who love to earn everything that we have.
I pray that you would help us to lay our deadly doing down.
If you'd help us to trust
that what you have accomplished on our behalf is enough.
And we walk in the fullness of this grace, and may you continue to transform our community to be a community of grace.
Beyond just slogans, may it be deep and real in our lives.
We pray this and trust your spirit to do this work in us.
So the name of Christ, we pray, amen.